Do you find it easy to think up
effective illustrations for the ministry?
I sure don’t.
But some have a real gift for it.
I have a friend like that.
He can look at almost any situation
and think of an illustration.
One day, we were traveling
along a mountain road.
I was driving.
My car wasn’t very good.
It was the best
I could afford at the time.
And suddenly,
a red warning light came on.
Quick as a flash, my friend said:
“I just thought of a great illustration.
The conscience
is like a warning light.”
His first thought is an illustration;
his second thought,
‘Uh-oh, we’re in trouble.’
Illustrations come naturally to him;
it’s just like breathing to him.
Some have the gift,
and the rest of us have to work at it.
But why should we work at it?
Why should we learn
to use illustrations?
Well, for one thing, because Jesus used them,
and he was the greatest Teacher of them all.
Jesus used illustrations a lot,
as we find when we read
Matthew 13:34.
I’ll give you a moment.
Let’s read this together.
Matthew 13:34:
“All of these things Jesus
spoke to the crowds by illustrations.
“Indeed, without an illustration
he would not speak to them.”
Jesus knew that an illustration
is often the most effective way
to touch the heart,
and that’s especially true
if people are featured
in the illustration.
Now, suppose I say,
‘If you’re going along the road
‘and you see someone in trouble,
stop and help him
even if he’s of a different race.’
That’s clear.
It makes the point.
Jesus’ illustration
about the neighborly Samaritan
makes the same point,
but it’s so much more effective.
It stirs the emotions.
It engages the mind.
We feel pity for the poor Jew
who fell among thieves.
We feel love for the Samaritan
who stopped to help him
and disgust for the priest
and Levite who didn’t stop.
We’re determined
not to be like them.
An illustration can put
a human face on a problem
and reinforce our determination
to apply the lesson.
A good illustration
can help a Bible student
grasp the point
he’s been struggling with.
Let’s see how that works
in a conversation Neeta
is having with Jade
in a coffee shop.
Let’s do this.
I’m a bit of a neat freak.
You don’t say.
So last time we discussed
how God created us to live forever,
which raises the question,
Why do we die?
Totally!
Totally, what?
No, like, I mean, I totally agree
that’s what we talked about.
Oh, right.
Let’s open to Romans 5:12.
Wait, uh, why don’t I read it
out loud so we can both enjoy it?
“That is why, just as through one man
“sin entered into the world
“and death through sin,
“and so death spread to all to men
because they had all sinned.”
OK, hold it.
Is Adam the one man?
Exactly.
This doesn’t make sense.
You said Adam was perfect
and wouldn’t die.
That’s right.
But then he sins and loses that.
So, what’s that got to do with me?
I die because he’s stupid?
Well, maybe it’s not
how I would’ve put it.
Maybe we can think of it this way.
When parents
with a severe genetic defect
have children, what happens?
Usually the kids inherit it.
Precisely.
When Adam sinned,
that sin became like a genetic defect
that caused sickness, aging, and death;
and since we’re all his children . . .
Oh, brilliant!
I get it!
Why don’t we watch a little video
that helps put it all together?
Why was Neeta’s illustration effective?
Jade was struggling to understand
how she could inherit imperfection from Adam,
a man who lived long ago,
and she wasn’t going to get past it.
So that was the point
Neeta chose to illustrate.
So when you’re studying with someone,
choose carefully what you’ll illustrate.
Let it be a main point in the lesson
or an idea that your student
is having trouble with.
There has to be a good reason
for using an illustration.
Our illustrations
should be appealing.
What do we mean by that?
An illustration will appeal to the student
if it’s about something familiar.
Now again, Jesus’ parable
of the Samaritan comes to mind.
The setting
of the illustration was nearby
—a familiar road
between Jerusalem and Jericho,
not the hanging gardens of Babylon
or the pyramids of Egypt.
And it was realistic.
There were many robberies along that road,
and the attitude of the priests and Levite
toward that poor,
injured Jew was totally believable.
Neeta also chose wisely.
Her illustration
was about inheriting a birth defect
—something she knew
Jade would understand.
Now, you may have
a couple of go-to illustrations
that you’ve used for years
and years—and years.
Why not look for fresh ones
that make the same points?
Put a little sparkle
back in your ministry.
Let’s consider
two ways of doing that.
First, be observant.
At Matthew 6:26, Jesus said:
“Observe intently
the birds of heaven.”
Jesus was aware of his surroundings,
and he thought about what he saw.
He observed the housewife,
children playing in the village square,
the farmer,
the rich man with his treasures.
So learn from Jesus.
Slow down, and smell the flowers.
Then think
of an illustration about flowers.
But what if you feel you
don’t have a creative bone in your body,
and yet you still need fresh illustrations?
Our second resource
is our publications.
Turn to the Watch Tower Publications Index
under “Illustrations,”
and you’ll find an abundance
of beautiful illustrations
that have been used in our publications.
And as you are studying
our later publications,
take note
of the illustrations that are used.
Choose simple illustrations.
Use little things to explain big things
and simple things
to explain complicated things.
A sister at a congregation meeting
used a very simple
but effective illustration
regarding Jehovah and the ransom.
She said, “When you’re shopping,
you never pay full price
for damaged goods.”
Her point?
We’re all damaged goods,
yet Jehovah
paid full price for us
with the life of his Son.
The illustration was simple.
It was appealing because it was
about something familiar—shopping.
It was also appropriate
to the audience.
There were a lot
of Bethelites in the audience,
and you know that Bethelites
never pay full price for anything.
When you’re illustrating a point,
avoid distracting the student
with minor details.
Minor details—if they don’t fit,
they can get you into a lot of trouble.
If they don’t work
with the main point of the illustration,
the student may focus
on the inconsistencies
and miss the point altogether.
Well, in summary, what do we say?
It takes time to develop good illustrations,
but it’s worth the effort.
If you have the gift,
use it and share it with others.
But if, like me,
you don’t have the gift, work at it.
You’ll be glad you did
and so will your Bible students.
Now Brother Kenneth Flodin,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will present
the next part of the symposium,
“Experience the Joy of Disciple-Making
—Improve Your Skills—
Teaching With Enthusiasm.”